# Forgetting morality

*This is the first essay I wrote for myself exploring the role of morality in our society. My views have since evolved, but wanted to share how my views of the topic have evolved.*Forget morality – 11/2023

In a developed society, an individual shouldn’t have to consciously think about what is best for the collective. What is best for them should be what is best for the collective. An ant doesn’t have to think about what is best for the colony, a bee doesn’t comprehend the goings on of the hive. They each know their role, and follow signals which are in their self interest and through completing their role they build a larger system that benefits everyone.

Other animal species are limited by their ability to cooperate in groups. They compete for food and mates, and devolve into violence when the groups get too large and competition too fierce. The same was the case for early humans, until we invented abstract language.

What makes us human is our language and ability to communicate symbols. Early societies were built around animist symbols that served as a way for people to come together. As the size of these societies grew, monotheistic religions such as Christianity and Confucianism in the East taught people how to cooperate on a larger scale. These moral codes taught people how to cooperate in bigger groups, as being in larger groups allowed them to produce more resources.

Now these value systems are losing traction. While some may argue that we are becoming a less moral society, I’d argue that that lack of morality is itself an accomplishment. We no longer need a moral code to cooperate as large scale groups. We have created systems that allow us to organize without having to consciously think about cooperation. We channel our primal competitive drive into symbols, abstracted several layers beyond violence. This has made us a safer species.

Now, few of us believe that moral codes were something handed down from another world by the god. They were designed, consciously or unconsciously, to get desired outcomes from a group. Our existing moral codes were designed to keep people safe and fed. In the western world, they have accomplished that mission, and we can shed them like an old winter coat.

The challenge in modern society is not who has the morally best society or the most desirable code of ethics, it is to build the largest and most organized group. Social organization allows us all to accomplish more together than we would alone. The larger the social group, the more it can accomplish. People across the globe are trying to organize into larger social groups. Examples include the United States of America, the European Union, and the Peoples’ Republic of China. Note the naming of all of these groups. Within the title, they emphasize the idea of people coming together to form a unified state, under which they can all go further.

The system must be well organized so that there is a desire to stay in the group. People want to be a part of the system, because they are better off than they would be on their own. People feel better off when they can accomplish goals they set for themselves. The sense of autonomy is key. By coordinating the group through a set of social signals, individuals feel they have autonomy. They follow the signal that it is in their self interest to follow. This signal leads them to do what is best for the group as a whole. The goal should be not to get people to comply. Striving for compliance in a system people do not want is a failed mission. Instead we should design systems that people want to be a part of.

This idea is the reason capitalism succeeds as an economic system. Without an economy, we would spend all our time foraging for food or farming to get our next meal. There would be little time for anything else. Because of the economy, one person is able to produce enough food for a thousand people, and those 999 other people can find other ways to improve the human experience. Capitalism rewards that person for being the most productive with money and status. They are considered valuable and can self assure themselves that they are a productive person. As our technology has gotten more advanced, we need fewer people to treat our basic life needs. What will happen when humans are not needed to treat our basic life needs, and most production is done by computers? When we talk about this today, we mostly talk about jobs and the economic prospects of this reality. But from a philosophical and emotional standpoint, where will our value come from as human beings when we are no longer needed for production?

We will need to design a new moral system, one not only designed to get people to cooperate in order to produce for the collective good. This new moral system should be built off our competitive advantage over machines – human empathy. We should value people not because they are wealthy or productive, but because they relate to others and are kind and compassionate.

I’m not talking about the kind of empathy that makes you give a couple bucks to someone on the street. I am talking about the idea of empathy that leads people to write and read literature. The connection of having another human being see and understand what is going on inside your head, to feel what you are feeling.

We already see this shift when it comes to marriage. Marriage was once an economic proposition, a way for women to gain sustenance and stability and for men to have a way to reproduce. Getting married was a practical way to survive. Now, marriage is an emotional proposition; we marry the person we love and enjoy being around. Getting married is a human connection and emotional phenomena. Now that we are more secure in our physical needs being met, we can shift social structures to be designed to meet our emotional needs.

This system built off empathy will allow us to transcend our old ideas of the self. The historical idea of the self was limited to the body, because our primary concern was to fulfill our bodily needs. In a world where we are not worried about our bodily needs on a day to day basis and are instead focused on more abstract needs, can we grow our idea of the self to include the people we empathize with, and who emphasize with ust? Consider again the analogy of the ant colony, is it more appropriate to view the self as the ant or as the colony as a whole?

We need to expand this idea of signals to the other spheres of our life, beyond the economic. How can the social sphere be improved through abstract signals?

Humans are animals, and we are driven by our animal urges. A successful social system harnesses these urges, instead of repressing them. How can we build a new social system that harnesses our urge for status and connection in a way that benefits everyone?

The best argument for this is capitalism succeeding over communism. People are motivated by their own self interest, not the group. The economic system built on rewarding the group over the self failed. The system built on aligning the incentives of an individual with the group led to a more prosperous society.

The challenge now is to expand our capacity for empathy. We need to relate and learn to people we seemingly have little shared experience with. To do this, we must focus on what we have in common, through the human experience, rather than our differences.